---
title: Question 1
description: A fascination problem that is quite unintuitive.
---
<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

#### Q1. A metal ring of mass M and radius R is set rotating about an exis going through the diameter. The experiment is conducted in space at an infinite distance. Its angualar velocity is $$\omega$$. Find tension as a function on angle $$\theta$$ from horizontal.
Solution: 
Let tension be T.
Free Body diagram for elementary section of ring.

Force balance along vertical,

$$(T+dT) cos(\theta + d \theta) = T cos \theta\tag1$$ 

Centripetal force acting inwards along horizontal,

$$(T+dT)cos(\theta + d \theta) - T sin \theta = dm(r)(\omega^2)\tag2$$

Simplifying (1),

$$Tsin\theta d \theta = dT cos \theta\tag1$$

Simplifying (2),

$$Tcos\theta d \theta + dT sin \theta = \frac{MR\omega^2}{2\pi} cos \theta d \theta \tag2$$

Let  $$T_0 = \frac{MR\omega^2}{2\pi}$$

Substituting (1) in (2), we get

$$cos \theta (dT cot \theta) + dT sin \theta = T_0 cos \theta d \theta$$

$$dT = T_0 sin \theta cos \theta d \theta$$

Integrating,

$$\int_{T_0}^{T} dT = \frac{T_0}{2} \int_{0}^{\theta} sin 2\theta d\theta$$

$$T = T_0\left( 1 + \frac{1}{2} sin^2 \theta \right)$$

$$\therefore T = \frac{MR\omega^2}{2\pi}\left(1 + \frac{1}{2}sin^2 \theta \right)$$

---

Implications of the above result.
Tension at horizontal level ($$\theta = 0$$), 
$$T_A = \frac{MR\omega^2}{2\pi}$$
Tension at vertical, i.e. top and botton points ($$\theta = \frac{\pi}{2}$$),
$$T_B = \frac{3}{2}\frac{MR\omega^2}{2\pi}$$

This implies that **Tension at top and bottom points is greater than tension at midpoint.**.

Intuitively, it would feel like tension would be maximum at the midpoints(pt A), and be 0 at top and bottom points(pt B). However, as we have solved it, we can see that tension at A is minimum, and increases as we move up or down. But, our intuitiveness is not wrong, just misguided. If we consider a small section about the point B, we see that tension forces left and right cancel out to give a net force of 0. But actually it would be $$T_B$$. This is the key point.

---
