---
title: Question 11
description: Lengthier expressions
---

<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

#### Q11. Consider an isolated system of length $$L$$ and cross section $$A$$ as shown. There is a moveable, adiabatic wall placed at $${L \over 2}$$. Find net displacement of the wall, final temperatures and pressure. Consider adiabatic gas constant to be $$\gamma$$. Also find work done be the gases on the left and right portions.

----
#### Idea:

Here, we have a process that is neither isothermal, nor adiabatic. It  is clearly not a standard process. We shall get equal final pressures, but different temperatures.

Let $$l$$ be the net displacement.

First, we shall conserve moles. 

$$n_{1,inital} = n_{1,final}$$

We get two equations, by doing the same for $$n_2$$.

Since the process as a whole(over the complete system) is adiabatic, we can apply the adiabatic law for it.

$$PV^\gamma = \text{constant}$$

Substituting relevant values from  the equations we got before, we get, 

$$l = {L \over 2}\left(\frac{P_{1}^{1\over \gamma} - P_2^{ 1 \over \gamma}}{P_{1}^{1\over \gamma} + P_2^{ 1 \over \gamma}}\right)$$

Hence, we also get,

$$P_f = \left( { P_{1}^{1\over \gamma} + P_2^{ 1 \over \gamma} \over 2} \right)^\gamma$$

Using the first two equations, we get,

$$T_f1 = {T_1 P_{1}^{1\over \gamma} \over P_1}  \left( { P_{1}^{1\over \gamma} + P_2^{ 1 \over \gamma} \over 2} \right)^{\gamma-1}$$

$$T_f2 = {T_2 P_{2}^{1\over \gamma} \over P_2}  \left( { P_{1}^{1\over \gamma} + P_2^{ 1 \over \gamma} \over 2} \right)^{\gamma-1}$$

By definition, we have

$$W = \int P dV$$

For the left side, we have,

$$P(x) = \frac{P_1}{\left(1+{2x \over L}\right)^\gamma}$$

Now,

$$W = \int_{0}^{l} \frac{P_1}{\left(1+{2x \over L}\right)^\gamma} A dx $$

Hence, we get

$$W_{left} = \frac{AL}{2^\gamma (1-\gamma)} \left[ P_1^{1\over\gamma} \left( P_{1}^{1\over \gamma} + P_2^{ 1 \over \gamma} \right)^{\gamma-1} - 1\right]$$

Work done by the right part is just the negative of this.

$$W_{right} = \frac{AL}{2^\gamma (\gamma - 1)} \left[ P_1^{1\over\gamma} \left( P_{1}^{1\over \gamma} + P_2^{ 1 \over \gamma} \right)^{\gamma-1} - 1\right]$$
