--- 
title: Question 20
description: Self heating
---

<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

#### Q 20. Find the temperature of a resistor due to self heating as a function of time. Consider the resistor to be of resistance $$\rho_0$$, length $$l_0$$ and cross sectional area $$A_0$$ at temperature $$T_0$$. Assume the resistor to be connected to an ideal cell of constant electromotive force, $$\mathcal{E}$$. Consider its mass to be $$m$$ and its specific heat capacity to be $$s$$. Assume $$\eta$$ to be the fraction of heat the is used by the resistor to heat up, and the rest($$1-\eta$$) is lost to surroundings. Its coefficients of linear thermal expansion is $$K$$, and its thermal coefficient of resistivity to be $$\alpha$$. Assume it to be an isotropic material.

---

#### Idea:

$$\begin{circuitikz}
\draw
(0,0) to[battery,l=\mathcal{E}] (4,0)
(0,0) -- (0,2) to[resistor, l=R] (4,2)
(4,2) -- (4,0);
\end{circuitikz}$$

By the definition, WKT,

$$\rho = \rho_0 e^{\alpha \Delta T}$$

$$\implies R = \frac{\rho_0 e^{\alpha \Delta T} \cdot l_0 e^{K \Delta T}}{A_0 e^{2K \Delta T}}$$

$$\implies R = R_0 e^{(\alpha - K) \Delta T}$$

Where, $$R_0 = \frac{\rho_0 l_0}{A_0}$$.

WKT,

$$P = i \mathcal{E} \implies \eta{\mathcal{E}^2 \over R} = \frac{dQ}{dt} = m s \frac{dT}{dt}$$

Hence, we get:

$$T = T_0 + \frac{1}{\alpha-K} \ln \left( 1+ \frac{\eta (\alpha - K) \mathcal{E}^2 t}{m s R_0} \right)$$

Further,

$$R = R_0 e^{(\alpha - K) \Delta T} = R_0 \left( 1+ \frac{\eta (\alpha - K) \mathcal{E}^2 t}{m s R_0} \right)$$

Note, here we assume the the melting point of the resistor is basically infinite. It does not melt. Hence, its temperature at time, $$t = \infty$$, is also infinity. So is its resistance, and the current is zero. So, we can say it attains a steady state when time, $$t = \infty$$.


---

