---
title: Question 7
description: One way to find the moment of inertia of an ellipse
---

<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

#### Q6. Find the moment of inertia of an ellipse (lamina) about an axis passing through the centre, perpendicular to the lamina. Consider the ellipse to have semi minor axis of length $$b$$, and semi major axis of length $$a$$.

---

#### Idea:

There are many methods to find the moment of inertia. Here, we shall find the corresponding moments of inertia about the X axis and the Y axis, and use perpendicular axis theorem to find the moment of inertia about the Z axis. We shall work in Cartesian coordinates.

---

#### Solution:

The equation of the given ellipse is 

$$\frac{x^2}{a^2} + \frac{y^2}{b^2} = 1$$

Which can be simplified to,

$$x = \frac{a}{b} \sqrt{b^2 - y^2}\tag1$$

The moment of inertia of any body is generally given by,

$$I = \int_{Body} r^2 dm$$

Here, $$dm$$ will be,

$$dm = \sigma dA = \frac{m}{\pi a b} dx dy$$

Where, $$\sigma$$ is the superficial density.

Hence, we can write,

$$I_{XX'} = \int_{-x}^{x} \int_{-b}^{b} y^2 \frac{m}{\pi a b} dx dy$$

Where, $$x$$ is given by eq. (1).

$$\implies I_{XX'} = \int_{-b}^b \frac{2}{b} \sqrt{b^2 - y^2} \; y^2 \; \frac{m}{\pi b} dy$$

$$I_{XX'} = \frac{2m}{\pi b^2} \int_{-b}^b y^2 \sqrt{b^2 - y^2} \; dy$$

<details>
<summary> Steps for integral </summary>

$$\int_{-b}^b y^2 \sqrt{b^2 - y^2} \; dy$$

We shall use a substitution,

$$y = b \sin \alpha$$

$$\implies dy = b \cos \alpha d \alpha$$

And corresponding change of limits, we get

$$= \int_{-\frac{\pi}{2}}^{\frac{\pi}{2}} b^2 \sin^2 \alpha ( b \cos \alpha) \; b \cos \alpha d \alpha$$

$$= b^4 \int_{-\frac{\pi}{2}}^{\frac{\pi}{2}} \sin^2 \alpha \cos^2 \alpha \; d \alpha$$

Multiplying and dividing by $$4$$ for the $$\sin 2 \alpha$$ formula and using $$\sin^2 \alpha = \frac{1 - \cos 2 \alpha}{2}$$

$$= \frac{b^4}{4} \left( \int_{-\frac{\pi}{2}}^{\frac{\pi}{2}} \frac{1}{2} d \alpha - \int_{-\frac{\pi}{2}}^{\frac{\pi}{2}} \frac{cos 4 \alpha}{2} d\alpha \right)$$

$$= \frac{b^4}{4} \left( \frac{\pi}{2} - \frac{1}{8} \sin 4 \alpha \Bigr|\_{-\frac{\pi}{2}}^{\frac{\pi}{2}} \right)$$

$$= \frac{b^4}{4} \left( \frac{\pi}{2} - 0 \right)$$

$$\implies \int_{-b}^b y^2 \sqrt{b^2 - y^2} \; dy = \frac{\pi b^4}{8}$$

</details>

Which gives,

$$I_{XX'} = \left( \frac{2m}{\pi b^2} \right) \frac{\pi b^4}{8} = \frac{m b^2}{4}$$

Similarly, by analogy,

$$I_{YY'} = \frac{m a^2}{4}$$

Using perpendicular axis theorem,

$$I_\perp = I_{XX'} + I_{YY'}$$

$$= \frac{m a^2}{4} + \frac{m b^2}{4}$$

$$\therefore I_\perp = \frac{m}{4} (a^2 + b^2)$$
