---
title: Question 8
description: Moment of inertia of a torus
---

<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>


#### Q8. Find the moment of inertia of a torus about its axis of symmetry. Assume mass $$m$$, major radius $$R$$, minor radius $$a$$.
---
#### Idea:

We shall consider a circle, whose centre is placed at a distance $$R$$ from the origin on the X axis, and radius a, and we shall revolve this about the Z axis to form a torus. Hence, we can find its moment of inertia. We shall also make use of the fact that integration, i.e. area under a curve, for an odd function from $$-a$$ to $$a$$ is always 0, regardless of the function. This is obvious, but if you want, imagine an odd function, say $$f(x) = x$$, or $$f(x) = \sin x$$, and integrate, i.e. find its area, from $$-a$$ to $$a$$.

---

#### Solution:

From figure, equation on circle:

$$(x-R)^2 + z^2 = a^2 $$

$$\implies z = \sqrt{a^2 - (x-R)^2}$$(1)

We shall first find the volume of a torus, since it is necessary to find the moment of inertia. 

$$V = \int_{body} dV$$

$$= \int_{R-a}^{R+a} \int_{0}^{2\pi} \int_{-z}^{z} x dx d \theta dz$$

Where, $$z$$ is given by eqn. (1)

$$\implies V = 2(2 \pi) \int_{R-a}^{R+a} x \sqrt{a^2 - (x-R)^2} \; dx$$

Let $$u = x-R$$ $$\implies x = u+R$$ and $$du = dx$$. 

As $$x$$ varies from $$R-a$$ to $$R+a$$, $$u$$ varies from $$-a$$ to $$a$$.

$$V = 4\pi \int_{-a}^a (u+R) \sqrt{a^2 - u^2} \; du$$

$$= 4 \pi \left[ \int_{-a}^a u \sqrt{a^2 - u^2} du + R \int _{-a}^a \sqrt{a^2 - u^2} du \right]$$

Since, the first term in the bracket is an odd function, the entire term goes to zero. The second term is nothing but the area under a semicircle of radius $$a$$(centred at origin).

$$\implies V = 2\pi^2 a^2 R$$(2)

Now, to find $$I_{zz'}$$

$$I_{zz'} = \int_{body} r^2 dm$$

$$= 2 \int_{R-a}^{R+a} \int_{0}^{2\pi} \int_{0}^{z} x^3 {m \over 2 \pi^2 a^2 R} dx d \theta dz$$

Where, $$z$$ is again given by eqn (1).

By following the same substitution steps, we get,

$$I_{zz'} = {2m \over \pi a^2 R} \int_{-a}^a (u+R)^3 \sqrt{a^2 - u^2} du$$

Using binomial theorem,

$$= {2m \over \pi a^2 R} \left[ \int_{-a}^a u^3 \sqrt{a^2 - u^2} du + 3R\int_{-a}^a u^2 \sqrt{a^2 - u^2} du + 3R^2\int_{-a}^a u \sqrt{a^2 - u^2} du + \int_{-a}^a R^3 \sqrt{a^2 - u^2} du \right]$$ 

Here again, the first and third terms vanish. After integrating, we get,

$$= {2m \over \pi a^2 R} \left[ 3R \left({\pi \over 8} a^4 \right) + R^3 \left( {\pi a^2 \over 2} \right) \right] $$

$$\therefore I_{zz'} = m\left( {3a^2\over 4} + R^2 \right)$$


---

Here, we note that this formula works in the boundary condition of when $$a = 0$$, it becomes a ring, whose moment of inertia is $$mR^2$$. However, for some reason, if $$R = 0$$, we get a sphere, but the moment of inertia of a sphere is $${2\over5} mR^2$$, which we do not get according to this forumla.

---
